The Project Gutenberg eBook, The New Sunday Liquor Law Vindicated, by J.
Ewing Ritchie


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions 
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at 
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.




Title: The New Sunday Liquor Law Vindicated


Author: J. Ewing Ritchie



Release Date: August 21, 2016  [eBook #52863]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE NEW SUNDAY LIQUOR LAW
VINDICATED***


Transcribed from the 1855 William Tweedie edition by David Price, email
ccx074@pglaf.org





                                   THE
                          NEW SUNDAY LIQUOR LAW
                               VINDICATED.


                                * * * * *

                                * * * * *

                           BY J. EWING RITCHIE.

                                * * * * *

                                * * * * *

                                 LONDON:
                      WILLIAM TWEEDIE, 337, STRAND.

                                  1855.

                                * * * * *

                                   THE
                            PUBLIC-HOUSE TRADE
                                AS IT IS:
                                    OR
                        AN EPITOME OF THE EVIDENCE
                              TAKEN BEFORE A
                    COMMITTEE OF THE HOUSE OF COMMONS
                                  IN THE
                    PARLIAMENTARY SESSIONS OF 1853–4.

                           BY J. EWING RITCHIE.

                                * * * * *




THE
NEW SUNDAY LIQUOR LAW VINDICATED.


AN Act came into operation in August, denominated “The New Beer Bill,”
requiring public-houses to be closed on Sundays, with the exception of
the hours 1 to 3 p.m., and 6 to 10 p.m.  No sooner was it passed than it
was found there was a great decrease in the number of cases of persons
charged with drunkenness at the various police stations of the
metropolis.  Monday, instead of being a heavy day, was the reverse—the
magistrates had little or nothing to do.  But this great public good was
not brought about without inconveniencing some parties.  The publicans
felt their craft was in danger,—that they were, as Benjamin Disraeli
informed them the other day at Plymouth, “in a critical situation;” and
that if they acquiesced in the law, the result would be most
unsatisfactory, pecuniarily, to themselves.  Accordingly, they have
banded themselves into one compact Defence Association—they have taken
sweet counsel together—they have organised an opposition all over the
land.  Whether they have acted wisely is another matter: with the
evidence just published in two enormous Blue Books, I think silence would
become them better.  And so thought the knowing ones in the trade when
they accepted the new Bill instead of one that would have been harsher
still.  The opponents of the Bill—publicans by-the-bye—thus speak of it:
Mr. Luce of Hampton Court, “thinks it a despotic and tyrannical Bill.”
According to a Mr. Symes, “it is directed against all recreation on
Sundays—all relaxation after the toils of the week.”  Mr. Palmer said,
“The Bill ought to be called the Liberty of the Subject and Licensed
Victuallers’ Liberty Curtailment Bill.”  I take these extracts from the
report of a great meeting in Drury Lane in September.  Mr. Lyne, also a
publican, writes in the _Daily News_, that “since the curfew bell there
never was a measure which produced such general discontent.
Notwithstanding the genialness of the weather the social gloom which has
settled in the suburbs is indescribable.”  The _Daily News_, in the poor
hope of saving itself from annihilation, by opposing the new Bill, and
thus becoming the organ of the pot-house says:—“The Pharisees of our
drawing-rooms and saloons ought, before they are allowed to hamper and
annoy the honest poor by their enactments, to be compelled to share for a
season in the labour of the poor, in order that they might have some
conception of the privations which they entail upon their victims, and
the possible consequences of such privation.”  In another leader it draws
the picture of a working man returning from Brighton and starving in the
streets in consequence of the new Bill.  Such is an outline of the new
Bill, as described by the publicans and their champion, the _Daily News_.
Never was there a greater outcry and so little wool.  One would fancy
from the above remarks that an injustice was being done—such as the world
had never witnessed before.  You would have thought that at least we had
been robbed of _habeas corpus_, or that still more valued right the
Englishman’s right to grumble.  You would have expected every print to be
filled with tales of terror—you would expect every man you met to have
had a face of woe, and especially that the working classes, who have been
robbed of their rights in so atrocious a manner, would have talked of
armed resistance, or at least have provided themselves with pikes.  The
working men have not held a single meeting on the matter—not one single
groan has been wrung from them by the unheard of oppression under which
they now labour.  So callous and indifferent are they—so utterly callous
and indifferent are all other classes of society—that the publicans have
been compelled to come forward and so do battle for the working man.
What disinterested public spirit!  English liberty, torn, bruised,
bleeding, shunned by all who once worshipped her and whom she once
blessed, finds refuge in a public-house!  If you want her you must go to
the King’s Arms, or the Red Lion, and call for a pint of beer.

But I have over-stated my case: there have been some complaints from
parties not publicans after all.  On looking through a file of the _Daily
News_ for the last three months I find three such.  No. 1, is there
placed in the largest type, and headed, “Starvation by Act of
Parliament!”  You are alarmed.  Read on, your fears will soon cease.  The
writer says:—“Sir, I am a bachelor living in chambers, the resources of
my _ménage_ do not extend to cooking a dinner, and, like most persons in
my situation, I generally dine at a tavern in the neighbourhood.  On
Sunday, I attended the afternoon service at Saint Paul’s Cathedral, and
upon my return at five o’clock (what a circumstantial dog he is!) I
repaired with my appetite in excellent condition to my usual dining-place
in Fleet-street.  I was rather taken aback at finding a closed door
frowning upon me; but I rang the bell, and, after a brief delay, a small
part of the door was cautiously opened, and there appeared in the apeture
the head of a disconsolate looking waiter, who told me that the
establishment was closed in compliance with the provision of the New Beer
Bill, and that consequently I could not have any dinner.”  The next deep
pang of anguish bursts from the bleeding bosom of a Templar, who says:—“I
am a victim of this Act, being scarcely able to get any dinner before the
Sunday evening service.”  Another, a father of a family, says he dines at
five, and he finds the beer flat.  That I imagine is his own fault.
Surely it was not the Act of Parliament did that.  We shall next be told
when the beer turns sour that was also the Act of Parliament.  But
perhaps I am wrong.  A well-known judge declared Parliament could do
every thing but make a woman a man or a man a woman.  So, after all, the
father of a family may be right, and the New Beer Bill may be the reason
why his “arf-and-arf” is flat.

Now, I ask, is it not ridiculous, on the face of it, that an Act of
Parliament should be set aside, because a bachelor finds, once upon a
time, the door of his favourite hotel shut in his face; or because a
Templar says he can’t dine till near the time for evening
service,—though, for the life of me, I can’t see why he cannot; or
because the father of a family finds his beer is flat: yet this is all
the complaint I find, even in the _Daily News_.  We are told the working
men are robbed of their rights.  I don’t find the working men
complain,—why should they?  They know better than that.  The law, as it
stands, allows the working man to get all the beer he wants; and if you
turn to the evidence lately given before a Committee of the House of
Commons, you will find that the working classes are in favour of the
change, and that many of them, even the most drunken and dissipated, feel
that it would be a good thing if the public-houses could be closed
altogether on Sundays.  Many of the most respectable publicans in the
metropolis gave similar evidence before the same Committee.  All the
moral and decent people in the country are of a similar opinion.  The
Provost of Edinburgh shows that when Forbes Mackenzie’s Act came into
operation in Edinburgh drunkenness and crime decreased; that when the
magistrates allowed it to fall into abeyance, drunkenness and crime
increased.  Evidence was read before the Committee, by the Rev. Mr.
Baylee, to show that some years since a great reformation had been
effected by the partial closing of public-houses, and Mr. Balfour showed
how the metropolis had improved in this respect within the last few
years.  The question is, Is this improvement to be continued?  No one
expects to make men moral by Act of Parliament; no one expects the
policeman to take the parson’s place; but when we see a great good
done,—when we see a fruitful source of crime and poverty and disease
arrested, are we to pause because a Templar cannot dine till evening
service, or because the father of a family complains that his beer is
flat?  I forgot the publicans: are they to stop the way?  I trust not.
It is nonsense to say the working-man is deprived of his beer; he is not.
All the beer a man needs he can buy now.  The public-houses are allowed
to be open sufficiently for that purpose.  It is clear what the publicans
are fighting for; the welfare of the working-man is a mere pretence,—the
rights of Englishmen is a mere pretence,—they want to sell more beer,—to
sell the beer that shall intoxicate; all that the new Bill seeks to do is
to prevent a man sitting all Sunday night in a public-house, spending his
last shilling there, and thus robbing his wife and family of that which
should feed and clothe and maintain them during the week.  The publicans
themselves confess the Sunday trade is an abominable one.  More than one
publican, examined before the Committee, confessed this to be the case.
The evidence of Mr. Wayland, the Marylebone City missionary, and others,
all went to show that it is the Sunday drinking that does so much harm,
and that was the effect of the late hours at which public-houses were
allowed to be kept open.

I have just seen forty-eight circulars returned from various employers of
labour in different parts of the metropolis, addressed to them by the
Committee of the London Temperance League.  The questions proposed were
as follows:—“Have you perceived any change with respect to the hour at
which your workpeople commence their labours on Monday morning?  Have you
noticed any improvement, or otherwise, with respect to the aggregate
amount of time your workpeople are at their employment during the entire
week?  What is your opinion as to the general effects of the recent Act
or Parliament in relation to the management of public-houses, or upon the
happiness and well-being of your workpeople?  Is it your opinion that the
hours during which spirituous and fermented drinks may be obtained on
Sundays should be subject to further restrictions?”  Of these replies
thirty-two were favourable,—twelve decidedly the reverse, and four
neutral.  Thus we have employers in favour of the new Bill,—the poor in
its favour,—many of the publicans, who feel the Sunday trade not to be
respectable,—in short all classes in its favour except one, and that a
section of the publicans who want to sell more beer, and, to do so, cant
about the interests of the working classes and the liberty of Englishmen.
Cant at all times is loathsome; the cant of the hypocrite is bad enough,
but this is infinitely worse.  I know nothing more nauseating, nothing
more false.  Men talk about the cant of the religious—and we have too
much of that; but that does no harm: but this cant is intolerable, one’s
stomach turns at it; this raising the fair banner of freedom to pander to
the demoralization of the public,—this talk by the publican of the rights
of the working-man, in order that he may be decoyed into the public-house
and made drunk, and robbed of all he has, is cant as fearful and
sickening as any ever uttered.

There may be defects in the Bill; I do not say there are not.  Like most
pieces of parliamentary legislation it is bungling enough, and the
convenient latitude attached to the definition of the word “traveller”
may rob it of almost all its beneficial effects.  That it may also create
occasional inconvenience I freely admit, but the case at present is all
in its favour; the protest raised against it is the same.  But the
publicans oppose it.  I could understand if the public-houses were
altogether closed on Sundays they might say it robbed the public of
reasonable refreshment; but they have no pretext of the kind, and their
opposition is now, I take it, the strongest argument in favour of the
Bill.  It is clear, now, why they oppose it; it is not the benefit of the
public they seek so much as their own.  It is the drinking beyond what is
reasonable,—the intoxication of the working classes on the Sunday
night,—the repetition of the scenes which have already brought such
disgrace on the land, and such misery on our homes, for which they fight.
For these reasons they denounce the Bill.  For these reasons every
well-wisher to his country, every sober man and woman, should give the
Bill their hearty support, taking it for good as far as it goes, and
seeking, if any change be made, that the change be one which the
publicans shall like even less.  We are told there is to be a contest; we
are told the publicans will not let well alone; we are told next session
they will agitate for the removal of this “unjust and iniquitous law.”
Let them do so; it will be the worst day’s work for them they ever did.
Let them do so, and an agitation will be begun, and a public sentiment
will be created, and an array of facts shall be turned against them, as
shall shake their trade to its very base.  Wisdom would counsel them
silence.  Wisdom would recommend them not to call public attention to
their craft—as they will not follow her guidance,—as they find fault with
the Committee and the _Advertiser_, which accepted the Bill rather than
see one more stringent passed, the masses can await with confidence the
result.  The middle classes of this country know the horror of Sabbath
drinking too well, the poor of this country know it too well; neither are
to be cajoled by a pretence, on the part of the publicans, to advocate
their interests or uphold their rights.  It is a question of the public
on one side and the publicans on the other.  The agitation against the
Bill is the most shameless, selfish, dishonest agitation ever begun in
this country.  I know not if it will be continued much longer; I know
that if it is, it will have most disastrous results, so far as the
publicans are concerned.  If even Disraeli will refuse to make political
capital out of them, notwithstanding their urgent request to the
contrary, they must be in a doleful plight.  Their cause must be bad
indeed.  Their battle must be lost almost before it be begun.

                                * * * * *

                                * * * * *

    Printed by R. BARRETT, 13, Mark Lane, for W. TWEEDIE, 337, Strand.




***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE NEW SUNDAY LIQUOR LAW
VINDICATED***


******* This file should be named 52863-0.txt or 52863-0.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/5/2/8/6/52863


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org 

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary 
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

